NARRATOR: Today, about 98%
of the atomic matter
in the Universe consists
of hydrogen and helium.
But thanks to threshold three,
that other 2% is made up
of all the other elements
in the periodic table.
That makes some amazing
things possible
because these different elements
can combine to form
an almost infinite number
of different types of matter.
Objects that are
much more complex
than stars could now form.
Objects like planets,
and that was the
work of threshold four.
Here's how it works.
When new stars are formed,
they're surrounded
by huge clouds
of chemically rich matter
our ingredients
for this threshold.
These clouds spin
in different orbits
around the newly forming star,
creating Goldilocks conditions
that are just right
for elements to combine.
Some atoms combine chemically
to form a variety
of different molecules,
but also, atoms
and molecules often
clump together to form bigger
and bigger lumps of matter.
This process
is called accretion.
And eventually it goes
on to form entire planets.
Now, since lighter elements
are much plentiful
in the Universe
many planets consist mainly
of hydrogen and helium
like Jupiter and Saturn.
But because hydrogen
and helium atoms are so light,
intense radiation
sometimes blasts them away
from regions close
to the new star.
Those regions then contain
a relatively high concentration
of other heavier elements.
And eventually, these elements
may clump together
through accretion to form solid
planets such as our Earth.
In our planet's crust
for example,
the most common elements are
oxygen, silicon, aluminum,
and iron,
not hydrogen and helium.
Our earth formed about
4.5 billion years ago,
but the very first rocky
planets may have formed
within a billion years
or so of the Big Bang.
These planets represent
new forms of complexity
because they contain a
much greater diversity
of chemical substances
that had ever existed before,
and that could create
even more complex entities
such as the first
living organisms.